hey all this is just welcome back to
rates and wrath huge farm today I want
to address a question that I get asked a
lot as a modern homesteader and that is
how do you make money on a small farm
our farm has never been our main source
of income this is not how we pay our
bills however we live on a pretty low
income and if you have been researching
having a homestead or made any attempts
at it you've probably learned pretty
quickly that it is expensive upkeep and
the maintenance just getting the
structures in order it all adds up
really quickly and so for us whenever we
got started it became apparent very fast
that we were going to have to be really
resourceful as far as putting all of
this together and maintaining it my goal
from the beginning has always been that
any homesteading endeavor that we do
could pay for itself in that way
anything that we keep from it the food
that we heat from it is covered by that
endeavor itself so for me I always have
needed my homesteading endeavors to
generate some sort of income so that it
could offset the cost of keeping the
homestead we've tried a lot of different
things a lot of things have worked a lot
of them have not and today I'm just
gonna share with you some of our
successes tell you some of our failures
and also share with you some ideas that
I've read about that I've heard other
people doing or that I plan to do
sometime in the future before we get and
talking about how to make money let's
talk really briefly about how to save
money now your mindsets have to change
when you come into this lifestyle unless
you just have a ton of resources there
are a lot of things that you can do to
save money the mindset of only using
what you need
and being resourceful in getting in it
is a very basic mindset and having a
homestead for instance at any point of
having your homestead you're going to
have certain food items that are coming
into your kitchen like if you have
chickens and you have a lot of eggs now
when you lived in town and you had a
regular grocery budget you might have
eaten a dozen eggs a week you probably
grocery shop based on what you felt like
eating or felt like cooking and then you
bought your eggs accordingly however if
you get on a farm and you get a flock of
20 chickens and then you find that
you've got six dozen eggs a week a lot
of times the most resourceful thing for
you to do is not to sell those extra
eggs but to use those extra eggs and cut
off that much more from your grocery
bill since we started homesteading we
eat six dozen eggs a week a lot of terms
in our house we eat quiche being omelets
we eat fried eggs on top of everything a
lot of times we have eggs and toast for
breakfast we eat way more eggs than we
ever did before we had a farm but now
it's this is what we have so this is
what we're going to use first another
mindset that has to be confronted when
you start a homestead is that you just
go buy what you need new being
resourceful and reusing materials is a
major way to save money so that you
don't have to make as much to make
progress on your farm our garden beds
are made out of used tin and cedar
trimmings which are the first cuts off
the wood from a lumber mill we go pick
those up a whole trailer cost $75 and
it's a fraction what it would have taken
to build those beds have we bought new
lumber from the local hardware store our
go barn is made entirely out of fence
pickets from a privacy fence that we
tore down when we moved into this house
we saved all of that wood took the nails
out which was a pain in the butt but it
saved us a whole lot of money and we
were able to build a goat barn for next
to nothing and the goats themselves we
got those from bartering with a local
family they needed a job done and they
were
looking to downsize their Nubian goat
herd and we had the skills to do that
job my husband and his brother went out
and spent a few days tearing down an old
garage and hauling it all off from their
property and they paid us in goats I
have a great go herd that I would have
never been able to afford if I had had
to go buy those goats individually and
then the goats themselves they became a
source of resources for a farm through
milk and having kids and all of that
came from bartering and being
resourceful so I want to get into how to
make money but the very first thing you
can do is to assess yourself as a
consumer and see where am i spending
extra that I don't have to be what
things could I make from scratch instead
of spending extra for them already being
premade what materials could I reuse
what skills do I have to barter all of
these things are really important
mindsets if you are seeking a
back-to-basics lifestyle now anytime I
have done any sort of search on like
Pinterest or just Google about how to
make money on a farm a lot of times you
get a really long list that tells you
some pretty basic ideas but doesn't go
into depth with it and usually at the
top of the list is sell extra eggs now I
want to head out to the chicken coop and
give you a little bit of information
about my experience with that as a
financial endeavor now you stand to make
anywhere between three to six dollars a
dozen on farm-fresh eggs of course this
varies really based on your region
how you're selling them where you're
selling them your marketing and how you
feed your chicken so if you are a small
family and that has a small flock of
chickens and you are eating as many as
you can possibly standing and you have a
few dozen extra eggs every week
depending on where you live you could
just put a little sign out front and say
farm-fresh eggs four dollars a dozen and
sell them to whoever stops at your house
to buy them and in that you could make
an extra fifty bucks a month and pay for
your chickens pay for your feed cost and
you get to eat however many eggs you
decided to keep that month pretty much
for free but let's say you really want
to step into the place of making a good
profit on your chickens now I live way
out in the middle of
where it takes 25 minutes to drive
anywhere from my house and so selling
eggs out of my house wasn't really an
option also it didn't make financial
sense to me to have multiple egg buyers
that I'd have to drive all over the
place delivering eggs because again my
gas cost at that point would eat up my
entire profit margin what I found to be
the best way was to find one buyer like
a bakery or a restaurant and sell them
all of my excess eggs in the week I made
less money per dozen doing this but what
I saved in gas and time made up for it
another lucrative way for me to sell
eggs was at the farmers market you have
to check your state laws and everything
for me I had to take a refrigerator and
take wash eggs in new cartons to the
farmers market I had to spend more on
cartons and spend more time washing the
eggs however I was able to sell my eggs
there for five dollars it doesn't
whereas when I was selling to the bakery
I was only getting three and a half
dollars to visit my hesitation and
counting on selling eggs for eating as a
main source of your income is that
chickens can be kind of sickle in their
lane if it gets too hot or if it gets
too cold or if your flock gets a little
sick what happens is they stop laying
and then you don't have any eggs to sell
but you have customers who are expecting
them too many times I have heard of
small farmers buying eggs for their own
family at the store in order to upkeep
contracts where they have customers who
are buying eggs for eating and to me the
profit margin just isn't good enough for
that I ended up making the decision that
selling eggs for eating was not a
lucrative way to make money on a farm so
we dropped our flock significantly I now
have 16 laying hens which really just
provide enough for our family we are
looking to expand that just a little bit
but not to sell eggs for eating if you
will put a little bit more effort and
finances on the front end into your
chicken flock and develop a line of
chickens that someone else would want to
have either by developing a beautiful
line of rare heritage breeds that
someone might be interested in
purchasing and showing or what we do as
we have bred our chickens for egg color
we get really beautiful color
eggs with browns and blues and greens
and so any extra eggs that I have out of
my chickens can be sold as hatching eggs
now the same dozen eggs that I used to
sell for five dollars at the farmers
market or for three dollars at the
bakery
I can sell now as rainbow hatching eggs
for 25 dollars and the price for that
can go up higher and higher depending on
how nice your lines are how great your
eggs are it just depends on how much you
want to put into it and of course that's
going to take you researching that's
going to take you sourcing good chickens
from the front end but there is money to
be made in selling hatching eggs and my
personal opinion is that if you are
looking to keep chickens and you're
wanting to make as much money as
possible from those chickens it is much
more lucrative to spend a little bit
extra time developing a good line of
birds and selling their hatching eggs
rather than keeping an average flock and
selling their eggs for eating because
ultimately you're feeding these chickens
the same either way and you can make a
lot more per dozen if you sell the eggs
is hatching eggs duck eggs sell for a
lot more than chicken eggs do especially
in specialty markets and to gourmet
restaurants and whereas there are a lot
of backyard chicken keepers not as many
keep people keep ducks because quite
honestly Ducks are nasty however they're
really easy to keep they're great
foragers all you have to provide them
with is some sort of shelter and clean
water and duck eggs for eating sell for
almost twice as much as chicken eggs and
those grocery stores little restaurants
and bakeries whereas they might have
already got a supplier for chicken eggs
because there are so many chicken
keepers you might be able to get your
foot in the door with duck eggs other
poultry that can be kept for eggs is
turkeys you consult turkey hatching eggs
if you invest in a good flock of a
heritage breed and quail quail eggs are
a big seller either as eating eggs at
markets or as hatching eggs and their
eggs are a really cool novelty because
they're really small and very beautiful
well is something that we are hoping to
get into
here in the next several months but I
know a lot of people who have had a lot
of success raising quail for their eggs
my incubator is in the storage closet
right now because it's not running we're
coming up on the end of summer and we're
not hatching eggs anymore for this year
if you're going to keep a flock of birds
for hatching egg for even if you're not
if you can source some hatching eggs
locally an incubator is a good source of
income on the homestead
now this sucker was an investment we
went ahead and bought a really nice
incubator that took the legwork out of
hatching eggs this makes it pretty easy
we get a really great hatch right out of
it and I want to say we spent something
like $700 on this on the front end which
was a big investment for us however we
have well earned that back with this
incubator in the two years that we've
had it the first year that we had this I
ran this incubator and hatched 80 chicks
out every week all through the spring
and the early summer and I made a deal
with the local feed store to buy my
chicks for two dollars each so they
could sell them for 250 each and sold
them 80 chicks a week for almost three
months you do the math on that it was a
pretty lucrative endeavor and it paid
for our incubator since then I have
hatch our own eggs and sold colorful egg
layers on Facebook groups so basically
with this
I went from taking a dozen eggs and
selling them for five dollars each at
the farmers market to raising chicks
that would produce eggs that were good
for hatching and selling those hatching
eggs for twenty-five dollars each
- then hatching the eggs and with the
hatch rate we were getting with this
incubator a dozen eggs generally yielded
us a nine or ten chicks which we would
sell for five to eight dollars each so
out of the same dozen eggs we went from
making five dollars to twenty-five
dollars to around seventy-five dollars
by hatching them out and selling them as
chick while we're on the subject of
selling baby animals let's talk about
goats
[Music]
if you're gonna have a home dairy you're
gonna have baby goats because a goat has
to go through a pregnancy and kid in
order to begin lactating and so you
won't have milk without having baby
goats and when you start breeding all
your goats in order to get them in milk
soon you are going to be posed with a
question oh my gosh what do I do with
all these baby goats now selling your
goat kids is a form of income on the
farm in order to keep your goats and
milk you're gonna have to breed them
every year and every year they're going
to have anywhere between one and four
kids again just the same with the
chickens how much money you're gonna get
out of those baby animals it really
depends on how much you put into your
lines if you want to make the investment
in well bred goats and do the work of
having them registered and keeping up
with all of that you will make more
money for your kids it does vary by
regions but a well bred registered goat
kid here where I live goes anywhere
between you know two and five hundred
dollars on average we decided not to go
that route we really wanted to keep our
goats just for the sake of having a home
dairy and therefore we don't go through
the process of registering all of them
we do breed them for positive traits and
we try to breed out the negative traits
but because we don't go the route of
literate but because we don't go the
route of linear appraisals and keeping
up with papers our goat kids do sell for
less it still does bring some money back
onto the farm though this year I sold
all of my little dough links for one
hundred and fifty dollars each and my
buck links for something around eighty
to a hundred with six toes kidding we
got 14 kids out of that so you can
figure out pretty quickly that that
covers a lot of goat feed depending on
your family's needs if you have excess
milk you can sell that as well now we
are currently not selling goat's milk
because we do have a few bottle babies
that we kept and their consumption along
with our family's consumption we
actually don't have any extra even
though we're getting two gallons of milk
a day but if you do have excess milk it
is pretty par for the course to be able
to sell
five dollars for a half gallon raw milk
another thing to consider if you do have
any sort of heard like a goat herd or if
you keep a bull or if you keep a boar
any sort of male animals is that a lot
of farms don't have the space or the
ability to do that so you can offer stud
services of your animals and bring in a
little extra income better bred animals
are going to bring you more incomes so
this might be a reason to invest in a
really well bred but because you can use
him to breed your own goats but then
also earn some money back on him by
offering him out for stud services now I
really don't condone getting into the
business of puppy breeding unless you
are going to really take it seriously we
have a guardian dog that we got from a
family it was no longer able to keep her
and she is a great dog that was bred
terribly she has horrible joints and she
experiences so much pain because someone
bred her irresponsibly but if you do
make the investment on really high
quality Guardian dogs that is something
to consider if you're willing to do the
testing and upkeep in order to breed
them well that can be a really good
source of income for your farm what
about making money in the garden I am
the garden girl so let's talk about how
I have supplement our income with plants
our greenhouse was a gift from
Jeremiah's Nana a couple of years ago
and we were super excited to have it
because it meant that we could extend
our growing season and start our own
plants from seeds the first year that I
sold started plants it was completely by
accident
I actually just really overestimated how
much I would need I got excited and
started a whole bunch of different kinds
and just didn't have room to plant all
of them so while I was doing the farmers
market I took the extra plants one day
because I just didn't have anything else
to do with them and ended up making a
couple hundred dollars on extra plant
starts completely without a plan to do
that so this year I decided I would plan
on it I intentionally started a few
hundred more plants than I knew I was
going to need and I probably made
something like five hundred dollars
selling those now the key to that was
starting varieties that were not widely
available at local stores really
focusing on a lot of different heirlooms
I sold a lot of tomato starts because I
had a lot of varieties that people had
never even heard of before next year I'm
actually planning on signing up for
every plant cell that I can using a heat
map to get my plants really established
and I'm hoping to be able to really
increase the amount of income that I
make in the spring by selling started
plants now let's walk down to the garden
and talk about selling the vegetables
that you'd grow one mistake a lot of
small farmers make is that they become
so focused on selling their goods that
they get in a little over their head and
they end up not having enough to meet
their own family's needs I can't stress
you enough don't do that meet the needs
of your household first and foremost you
are not doing the work of having a small
farm of taking care of chickens and
milking animals and doing all of the
work of a garden in order to sell your
goods and then have to buy food for
yourself you will burn out on that I
actually don't sell vegetables out of my
garden right now I get asked all the
time what do you do with all that food
well I can it I put it up and I try to
cover as much of my family's needs for
the whole year as possible out of this
garden while it's producing to me that's
what makes all this work worth it but if
you do want to market your garden goods
take a few factors into consideration
for instance if you don't have the time
to do a weekly market or if you don't
have the scale in order to really
provide and make that market a lucrative
thing set up a stand out in front of
your house to just sell a little bit of
extra and bring a little bit of money
back into your farm perhaps enough to
cover your water bill
whatever your extra you're using in
order to make your garden grow another
idea is to do a CSA style box instead of
going to market every week and just
selling a little here and there
advertise from your farm that you are
providing a weekly box and have people
pay for them upfront when you're just
getting started do a small spark do four
weeks worth at once and what you'll do
is every week you will provide your
customers with a box of what your farm
produces
this could be a dozen eggs it could be
whatever is coming out of your garden
that week and you might round it out
with some home baked goods from your own
kitchen or some canned jams or jellies
this gives you the ability to keep it at
whatever scale you want it guarantees
that you're going to have a buyer you
can either set up for people to come
pick it up or you can meet all your
customers in a central location on a
certain day and it saves you having to
drive around everywhere and drop
everything off one thing to consider if
you're going to be marketing the goods
for your garden is that some vegetables
are simply way more marketable than
others right now I could go to Whole
Foods and buy organic non-gmo ears of
corn for fifty to seventy-five cents
each because they're in season and and
therefore they're pretty cheap however
it's a very same store heirloom tomatoes
are going for something like five
dollars a pound so in the same amount of
space that I could grow corn and grow it
heirloom and non-gmo I can grow heirloom
tomatoes and I can make a lot more money
per pound in per square foot of space
with that crop consider in what you're
choosing to grow if you are going to be
selling these things especially in
market that people are interested in
something that they can't just go buy at
the grocery store
now you might hold a lot of value on
your garden goods because you know what
went into it but unfortunately a lot of
people that aren't into growing food
they're only experienced with picking
what they want to buy is the grocery
store so if you grow Black Beauty
zucchini which is very similar to what
is sold in grocery stores and they're on
sale for 79 cents a pound they're those
same customers are going to look at your
farmers market and table and say well
yeah it's homegrown but why would I pay
250 a pound for this to this farmer but
if you grow a variety of zucchini that
that customer has never even seen before
in their life they're not going to
question at all why yours costs more and
then what they're gonna get at the
grocery store the kitchen can be a great
source of income for the small farmer
now chances are if you are seeking out a
homesteading or back-to-basics lifestyle
you are working on your kitchen skills
and whether you've already got them or
you are acquiring them cooking from
scratch is a big part of this lifestyle
the thing is is that a lot of people
don't cook from scratch anymore just
homemade cookies
a really big deal to somebody who rarely
ever turns on their oven so you can sell
homemade baked goods he'll make jams and
jellies and people love it especially if
you use the ingredients from your farm
goats milk caramel or cakes made with
farm-fresh duck eggs any of these things
are huge marketing points on these goods
it's another thing that you can sell
from your house you can set up a
Facebook page and just market it every
week hey I'm going to have fresh banana
bread five loaves available tomorrow
first-come first-serve and you can sell
these really at a premium and if you're
willing to pursue them know how you can
really tap into some niche markets that
are very under marketed like in your
area is there anyone that's making
gluten-free homemade goodies
is there anyone that's making paleo
homemade getting's if you're willing to
figure out how to do that and market
those things a lot of times you can make
a lot of extra money marketing to a
niche that is not used to having
products offered to them now if you're
farming you are acquiring certain skills
like taking care of a farm can offer
firm sitting services and just get your
name out there and provide people with
the opportunity to leave their farms in
your capable hands while they go on
vacation or even provide emergency
services so that if a local small farmer
gets injured or has a family emergency
come up they can call you on short
notice and you can take care of their
farm for a fee every day of course
you're going to want to make sure that
you actually have the skills to do that
and you would want to look into some
insurance just in case anything happens
while you are taking responsibility for
someone else's farm there are a lot of
things that are produced on a farm that
you could sell that might not be a
standalone income on their own but they
could add to the income overall for
instance if you have farm animals you
are going to have a lot of poop to deal
with rabbit poop is fantastic for
gardens you can sell it by the five the
gallon bucket and if you have very many
rabbits at all you're gonna have a lot
of five gallon buckets poop you can
compost the bedding from all of your
animals start a really large compost
pile and sell compost to other people's
garden and speaking of Gardens
if you've already invested
and a tiller or if you have a tractor at
the beginning of the year you can put up
signs and advertise on Craigslist and in
local farm stores and feed stores your
services as a tiller getting other
people's and gardening plots ready there
are a lot of people who love to garden
but they don't have the physical
capacity to go out and prepare their
ground for it but if you have the
physical capacity and you've already
invested in the tools on your own garden
you can go make extra money by providing
those services to other people and one
last suggestion on making money on a
homestead is get crafty doing craft
fairs and making different products for
those things can be a huge asset to a
homesteading income I've seen people
make totes out of old feed bags make
soap I myself have made a lot of
different crafts including doing garden
markers with metal stamping and making
journals out of leather all of these
things can provide extra income and it's
one of those things that you're going to
get out of it what you put into it if
you're willing to really hustle the
crafting aspect can be a big input to
your homesteading income by themselves
these ideas might not be enough but when
partnered with changing your mindset to
become resourceful using things
secondhand and repurposing materials
using what you have and changing your
family's consumption habits based on
what's available to you and seeing
everything as an opportunity down to how
do I make the most out of my chicken
eggs what varieties do I need to be able
to plant in order to make the most just
surveying everything and say okay what
am i hoping to get out of this what
needs am i looking to meet here and what
can I do with the excess when add it all
together you actually can make money on
a farm you don't have to be some crazy
entrepreneur or super business minded in
order to make this work honestly the key
to making money on your homestead is
being resourceful and being really
honest with yourself about what you're
hoping to get out of it
looking at each and every Avenue and
seeing what is the maximum income that
you can make and then cutting back right
to the point of where where you can meet
the needs of your family and make the
income back and then not doing excess
over that I hope this helps you guys I
hope that you feel inspired to be able
to expand your homesteading ventures and
be able to afford them I bless you so
much thank you for watching until next
time
[Music]